hello everybody my name is Jay and I'm
one of the expert IELTS teachers here at
e2 language in this live class we're
going to look at IELTS academic writing
task 1 and we're going to look at
processes and diagrams which might look
something like this on test day ok just
spend a few seconds looking at this and
imagining how you would write a hundred
and fifty words on this picture
even if you're a native English speaker
and a gun writer you probably still need
a bit of a method to be able to do this
so let's take a closer look at this I'm
going to teach you how to do it
first things first you want to read the
graph description this is located above
the image and it's the first sentence in
the box it's up here whoopsie it's up
here the diagram below shows how paper
is made and recycled so it's pretty
simple and straightforward so it's
talking about how paper is made that's
this part of the diagram here and
recycled that's this part of the diagram
here what you will often find with
diagrams and processes is that there
will sort of be two sections okay and
we're gonna use this in a structure that
I'll show you now so first thing you
want to do is well or what you have to
do is you need to summarize the
information select and report the main
features and make comparisons where
relevant well it's a little bit
different for the process because I
can't see how you can possibly make
comparisons here anyway let's apply the
super structure to it the super
structure is a bit different to all the
other ones that I've taught you because
the diagrams and processes task is
different to the pie charts to the bar
graphs to the line charts for example in
this one you want to summarize described
process one described process to which I
just showed you and that's all so your
text is going to look like this on test
day first bit you have the summary then
you have process 1 process - and you're
gonna separate it out like this let's
look at how to summarize that's that
first sentence which is here all you
need to do is take that first sentence
that graph description and rewrite it in
your own words to say the exact same
thing that's how you introduce will
summarize this task
so the original said the diagram below
shows how paper is made and recycled my
summary says the given process
represents the way in which paper is
created as well as how it is recycled
let's go through this part by part they
said the diagram below I said the given
process process diagram they can be
interchanged as synonyms
they said shows I said represents be
careful when you're choosing a verb here
because illustrates represents these are
good verbs to use for the diagram
process demonstrate not a good verb
because it's not demonstrating is
something that moves exhibits not a good
verb so just use represents or
illustrates okay so how paper is made I
said the way in which paper is created
why did I do that while I'm showing off
a little bit and finally an recycled I
said as well as how it is recycled so I
want you to rewrite this sentence in
your own words you have two minutes to
do this starting now
cool let me give some feedback to those
of you in the live class here feel free
to write into the chat there cool the
provided diagram illustrates how paper
is being recycled well I guess you've
missed a part here because let's have a
closer look you've talked about how it's
recycled but we've it's also about how
the paper is made remember there were
two parts so why don't we make sure you
include both of those okay read it very
carefully that's fine that's fine
other than that looked good the given
figure it's not really a figure I would
say diagram or illustration represents
the process of the process manufacture
of paper and the way of recycling good I
would say this the given illustration or
diagram the given diagram represents the
process of manufacturing paper and the
way it is recycled that would be very
clear nice next one the diagram
illustrates the process of paper
production and how it is recycled you
win ten points Jason that's a beautiful
sentence the process as the process is
demonstrated no remember demonstration
is not the right verb represents the
process represents the production of
paper and how it is recycled fine good
we've done the first sentence that's
easy now we need to think about having
the process dividing it in two because
remember we had our two main paragraphs
so what you have to do on test day I
know this sounds weird but you need to
think about where you divide the process
because you want to write two paragraphs
okay this is pretty straightforward you
would divide it straight down the middle
here you would say okay this one will be
one two three four and five
then you would start again this becomes
overall paragraph one and then you would
start from here one two three four five
six and then back to here would be seven
so this gets mentioned twice and this
would be your paragraph two so we're
really splitting it down the middle
although this one here gets mentioned
twice so you need to have it okay then
you need to describe process one which
was on the Left I'll show you mine so
this is mine it says this creating paper
is a five-step process firstly
plantation radio to Pine thinnings are
harvested the wood is then debarked
using a special drum that grinds the
bark off the logs the deep bark wood is
then sent to a wood chipper and then on
to a thermo mechanical refiner that
usual utilizes water the product is then
finally sent to a paper making machine
so that's this so I said creating paper
is a five-step process what I've done
here is just given an overall summary
sentence of this half of the process I
want you to do the same describe the
overall process here on the Left you
have one minute to write one sentence
one sentence only
you
cool how did you go with that one you
should have just written one sentence
describing the overall process just let
me quickly look at the chat the diagram
represents how paper is processed and
how they are recycled that was from
before cool I'm gonna speed through this
a little bit quickly so do write down
your sentences for those of you in the
chat here I'll come back to you in a
second second sentence I wrote this
firstly Plantation radiata pine
thinnings harvested now I've taken this
patent what is it plantation radiator
pine thinnings straight from here and
I've said the first thing that happens
is they are harvested it doesn't say
that but I can assume that that's what's
happened so I want you to describe this
process in one sentence just the first
bit there the first step
cool how did you go yeah okay little bit
slow you need to move quite quickly in
this one anyway I'm going to speed
through again
so you've described the first step now I
wrote this the second step I said the
wood is then debarked using a special
drum that grinds the bark off the logs
please describe this process in one
minute
fine
in the subsequent stays the log is
debarked nice well done that's a good
that's a good one there
in the subsequent stays the log is
debarked fine then what I did and I want
you to follow me I actually included
these three parts into one sentence I
said the debark wood is then sent to a
wood chipper and then onto a thermo
mechanical refiner that utilizes water
because what I saw here was I saw this
water and I figured that it goes here
and it goes here as well because of this
thermo bit here obviously it's got some
heat right so I wanted to include this
send on to the chipper then onto here
which includes this so I want you to
describe this process which includes
three parts in one sentence you have one
minutes
cool let me check the chat here see how
you guys are going good that's okay
that's okay that's okay give you a
little bit longer for this one get this
sentence right it's a bit of a trick all
right let's move on to the next step I
said the product is then finally sent to
a paper making machine so I want you to
write describe this process here this is
the last step the final sentence of
process one
cool cool cool how's that looking
lastly paper is produced in the paper
making machine
nice that's fine that's fine that's fine
so if we put all of our sentences
together we did it systematically step
by step sentence by sentence your
paragraph should look like this I'm
gonna read it again and it will make
more sense
I said creating paper creating paper
that's this process here on the Left
creating paper is a five-step process
firstly plantation radiator radiator
pine thinnings are harvested the wood is
then debarked using a special drum that
grinds the bark off the logs the
debarked wood is then sent to a wood
chipper and then on to a thermo
mechanical refiner that utilizes water
the product is then finally sent to a
paper making machine let's think about
our verbs for a second is our ears
that's kind of a that's not quite a verb
they're using a special drum that grinds
is utilizers finally sent ooh
interesting so what have we got here
we've got the present simple actually
here here here here here and here the
product is then finally sent send I send
yesterday I sent interesting I don't
know why I've used the past tense verb
here but I have but you can see the
majority of the verbs are present simple
ok let's move on to describing process
number two this is the one on the right
hand side here let's do it step by step
I'll show you the paragraph at the end
so my first sentence I want to sort of
describe this process overall
I said recycling used paper back into
paper consists of a six step process
starting with the paper product as a
newspaper
sorry such as a newspaper let me read it
again recycling used paper back into
paper
consists of a six step process starting
with the paper product such as a
newspaper I want you to describe the
overall process here including the
newsprint or newspaper
cool how's it looking everybody hey if
you're on YouTube by the way and you
haven't clicked like please do I like it
thumbs up they're nice do leave a
comment and don't forget to subscribe so
lastly paper in the paper recycling
phase there are six steps to achieve
commencing with the use of paper
products such as newspapers yes good yes
good that's fine that there are six
steps there are six steps comma so no
use for to achieve paper produced from
recycled reused newspaper through a six
step process good not bad not bad not
bad
good now before I do this I'm actually I
just realized I made a mistake back here
when I was talking to you about the
verbs and I said that I used the past
tense here I didn't in fact it was this
verb I used all present simple but what
I've done here is I've used passive
verbs is sent are harvested is debarked
this one's present simple that's why
grinds the debug word is sent that's
fine so I've used a lot of passive verbs
here why because I don't care who did
the debarking or who sent the logs I
don't wanna say someone sent the logs to
the chipper no so put it in the passive
because I don't care about someone I say
the logs are then sent are sent to the
chipper for example so I'm using a lot
of passive sentences here which are
critical in describing processes if you
need help with passive sentences type
into the search bar this we have a whole
grammar channel by the way type into
that search bar e to core skills and
you'll find a whole heap of grammar
videos that explain grammar including
passive sentences this is in YouTube use
this as your search term cool let's get
back to this one
and I apologize for getting off-topic
they're right next step the newspaper is
firstly collected from the curb and
after collection is spun on a cone now
why did I write that well take a close
look at this tell me what you think that
is I have no idea what that means it
just says after collection I can see an
arrow here spinning and this looks like
a cone so I said after that the
newspapers are spun on a cone I don't
know you describe this process for me
so I'm not sure what you decided to
write there I was a bit confused with
that one
Valentin has written after the second
stage the newspaper is being directed to
curbside collection yeah maybe pepper
juice ah yes I'm not sure either anyway
let's move on to this one I separated
this into an individual sentence so I
didn't combine steps here I just said it
the newspaper is then d inked now just
be careful because if you said newspaper
one you would then use it if you said
newspapers plural you would then use
they okay hopefully I got that right
so it the newspaper is then d inked
because we've got this crazy sort of
verb here D inked in some type of liquid
now I don't know about you but I looked
at this and I was like what the hell is
that there's not much information there
so I just said some sort of liquid I
noticed that there was liquid here so I
said it's the newspaper is d inked in
some type of liquid see how you go
describe this process
fine fine fine how's it going the use
paper is firstly collected from the
curbside and then a collection by
another machine this will then undergo
in the d inking machine with the aid of
a special liquid nicely said I like that
one that's good
cool all right let's move on to this
these three steps now have a look at my
sentence at the top I said cleaning and
fine screening happens next before it is
mixed with recycled pulp in a thermo
mechanical device I did not mention the
water here so perhaps I would lose a
point or two I'm not sure how strict the
IELTS examiner's are with little tiny
details like this but you may want to
mention also the inclusion of water in
these sort of in these two steps here so
again have a look down here cleaning and
fine screaming thermo-mechanical and
recycled pulp mix and there's also some
water here being used
I am mentioned as well in this bit here
I said cleaning and fine screening
happens next before it is mixed with
recycled pulp in a thermo mechanical
device including water please describe
these two steps including the water
cool yes how's it going how's it going
how's it going cleaning and fine
screening transform the recycled content
with pulp into a thermo mechanical
machine with water no it didn't
transform it into a thermo mechanical
machine with water yes you'll need to
rethink that sentence there after the
stage of D inking the newspaper sorry
after the state of D inking comma the
newspaper undergoes two main processes
of cleaning and fine screening yes good
that's good that's good that's good all
right I just want to go back a step I'm
sorry I just want to go back to this D
inking thing here now
I said I took this word here and I said
it was d inked which is a bit of a no
it's a bit of a crazy word I just
noticed some money on YouTube had a
better word than me which was remove the
ink the ink is removed let me write this
the ink is then removed so instead of
instead of using this word you can think
okay what does that mean to D ink well
it means to remove ink so this is a nice
way to say that in the IELTS examiner
would be happy that you've actually
transformed this into your own language
cool
where were we up to here now we up to
the final step and the final sentence of
our academic writing task 1 the end
product is then finally sent back to the
paper making machine to recreate paper
the end product is then finally sent
back to the paper making machine
to recreate paper please describe this
last process and then you are done
how's it looking in there
finally a paper is sent paper making
machine and ultimately made into a
recycled newspaper good finally yeah you
could I don't know if it's paper yet I
think it might be pulp or some sort of I
just said product because I wasn't sure
what it was so I just said the product
that's fine
yeah that's all looking good that's all
looking good well done well done well
done so what we'll have is this and let
me read this to you it should make sense
recycling used paper back into paper
consists of a six step process starting
with the paper product such as an such
as a newspaper the newspaper is firstly
collected from the curb and after
collection is spun on a cone it is then
d inked or removed of ink in some type
of liquid cleaning and fine screening
happens next before it is mixed with
recycled pulp in a thermo mechanical
device the end product is then finally
sent back sent sent back to the paper
making machine I've mr. word here sent
back to the paper making machine to
recreate paper let's have a closer look
at some of my sentence structures
because some of them as simple sentences
okay this is a complex one recycling
newspaper back into paper consists of a
six step process starting with the paper
products such as a newspaper the
newspaper is firstly collected from the
curb and after collection is spun on a
cone so I've combined two sentences
there compound sentence two sentences
joined with a conjunction it the paper
is then d inked in some type of liquid
this is a simple sentence and then I use
a complex sentence and then I use a
simple sentence for example there's no
rule about this but what you want to do
is make sure that you have some simple
sentences and some complex sentences now
simple sentences you might just choose
one step in the process and describe it
with a subject verb object right maybe
in the passive
complex sentences you might combine two
steps in the process and use a
conjunction like and or then for example
or some other way to make a complex
sentence but that's also important cool
let's recap what we did how we did it
and how we're going to do it on test day
what we did was this we summarized by
rewriting the graph description in our
own words then we divided the process or
the diagram into two we halved it and
then we described process one step by
step including an overview sentence then
we compared sorry it should say describe
there's no comparison here that's from
an old slide described but there's no
comparing that goes on it's just
describing the process we did the same
thing for this for the right hand side
of the diagram we described that process
sentence by sentence including an
overview sentence cool so this is how it
should look on test day this by the way
is a hundred and fifty six words
actually I missed the word so it should
be one hundred and fifty seven if I got
that right anyway as long as it's over
one hundred and fifty that's fine I'm
gonna read it to you sentence by
sentence I want you to listen to it
carefully the given process represents
the way in which paper is created as
well as how it is recycled creating
paper is a five step process firstly
plantation radiata pine thinnings are
harvested the wood is then debarked
using a special drum that grinds the
bark of the logs the debarked wood is
then sent to a wood chipper and then
onto a thermo mechanical refiner that
utilizes water the product is then
finally sent to a paper making machine
recycling used paper back into paper
consists of a six step process starting
with the paper product such as a
newspaper the newspaper is firstly
collected from the curb and after
collection is spun on a cone it is then
d inked in some type of liquid cleaning
and fine screening happens next before
it is mixed with recycled pulp
in a thermo mechanical device the end
product is then finally sent back to the
paper making machine to recreate paper
this ladies and gentlemen deserves an
IELTS 9 even though I've missed a word
at one word I missed and a nice I didn't
include the water bit but otherwise it's
perfect in every sense grammatically
lexically in terms of vocabulary the
structures good and it's definitely
written on tasks these are the four
things you need to do on test day the
other thing is you need to make sure
you've written a hundred and fifty words
because you'll be surprised writing with
a pen and paper you can write it seems
like you've written a lot more than you
actually have
you need to practice you need to
practice so just before you leave I want
to tell you one important thing you
should check out this website WWE -
language comm why because we give you
practice material quality practice
materials we give you feedback on your
writing we also have tutorials you can
join the live classes which include
writing speaking reading and listening
there's heaps and heaps of benefits to
signing up even if you're just a free
user so do that check it out the other
thing I want to tell you is this if you
need help with your grandma I want you
to search in YouTube e - cor am I gonna
change the name of this actually I'm
gonna change the name of the the channel
to search this e - words and rules we
searched that in YouTube you'll find a
number of really good grammar lessons in
the meantime it's gonna be created
called e - course skills so if you can't
find it search that anyway I hope that
was helpful what I'll do now is go to Q
and a for the paid members in the
webinar
Valentino's Tita hello sara is this
topic for general or academic this is an
academic one this is it's not common to
get this one but it is possible so you
need to know how to do this in academic
I don't know how common they are but you
get pie charts line graphs bar charts
what else is there two tables and this
diagram process there are five possible
ones that you'll get Susan in a single
paragraph can rewrite a simple past
simple present simple future is it
possible no you want to stick well you
don't have to in fact with this one here
as I showed you it's all in the present
simple it's all in the present simple
you you can't use other verbs we used
active and passive sentences but we've
used the single verb tense the simple
present so don't use other future verb
tenses there's no need
Jason doesn't need a summary the first
sentence is the summary the first
sentence is the summary and there's no
need for a conclusion either okay cool
Susan we should use only a single tense
it depends on what you're trying to say
so I can't just tell you to use a single
tent in diagrams and processes the one
that I just wrote it was simple present
tense only there was no other tense
because there was no past tense needed
I'm not talking about something that
happened I'm talking about something
that happens the process the logs are
debarked then they are there's your
present tense sent to the drumming
machine whatever it is so but it depends
because if you're doing a bar chart for
example and the x-axis is in the past
say 1976 you would say something like in
1976 there were 700 men who ate ice
creams so you would change the verb
tense because of the time of the x axis
of the bar chart so in other words for
diagrams processes I can only think it
would be simple present but for pie
charts and bar graphs and line graphs
and tables you may have to use simple
past as well maybe future you just need
to be careful cool I'm going to leave it
there thanks for
coming along hope it was helpful do you
do the practice that will help you
you